skills/gemini-research/SKILL.md, before:

______________________________________________________________________

## name: gemini-research description: Perform deep research on complex topics using the Gemini Interactions API. version: 0.1.46

# Gemini Deep Research Skill

Perform deep research on complex topics using the Gemini Interactions API. This skill uses the `research` CLI to manage long-running research tasks, providing real-time reasoning and comprehensive reports.

## Prerequisites

- `RESEARCH_GEMINI_API_KEY`: Required to access the Gemini Interactions API.

## Tools

### `research_run`

Start a new deep research task.

- **`query`**: (Required) The topic or question to research in depth.
- **`model`**: (Optional) The model ID to use for research (default: `deep-research-pro-preview-12-2025`).

**Example:**

```bash
scripts/research run "The impact of solid-state batteries on the EV industry"
```

### `research_list`

List recent research tasks and their status.

**Example:**

```bash
scripts/research list
```

### `research_show`

Show the details and report of a specific research task.

- **`id`**: (Required) The ID of the research task to display.

**Example:**

```bash
scripts/research show 5
```

Commit message:

Fix SKILL.md to be strictly compliant with agentskills.io spec

skills/gemini-research/SKILL.md, after:

---
name: gemini-research
description: Perform deep research on complex topics using the Gemini Interactions API. Use when the user needs in-depth information, technical analysis, or comprehensive reports on a specific topic. This skill leverages the Gemini Interactions API for multi-step reasoning and tool use.
metadata:
  version: "0.1.46"
---

# Gemini Deep Research Skill

Perform deep research on complex topics using the Gemini Interactions API. This skill uses the `research` CLI to manage long-running research tasks, providing real-time reasoning and comprehensive reports.

## Prerequisites

- `RESEARCH_GEMINI_API_KEY`: Required to access the Gemini Interactions API.

## Tools

### `research_run`

Start a new deep research task.

- **`query`**: (Required) The topic or question to research in depth.
- **`model`**: (Optional) The model ID to use for research (default: `deep-research-pro-preview-12-2025`).

**Example:**
```bash
scripts/research run "The impact of solid-state batteries on the EV industry"
```

### `research_list`

List recent research tasks and their status.

**Example:**
```bash
scripts/research list
```

### `research_show`

Show the details and report of a specific research task.

- **`id`**: (Required) The ID of the research task to display.

**Example:**
```bash
scripts/research show 5
```
